While academic achievement constitutes a crucial factor for social justice as well as for socio economical status (e.g. Hoff, 2013; Sirin 2005), equal access to education is in the united States considered a fundamental right under the 14th amendment of the constitution (Plyler v. Doe, 1982). Poor academic outcomes on the other hand contribute to growing socio-economical injustice, poverty, and criminality, whereas ethnicity and socio-economical status (SES) are both predictors and effects of academic achievement, which suggests a reciprocal and mutually amplifying process between these and other related variables (e.g. Marchant & Finch, 2016; Miller, Votruba-Drzal, & Coley, 2019; Paschall, Gershoff, & Kuhfeld, 2018).
Public schools are usually hold accountable for student’s academic success (Domaleski, D'Brot, Keng, Keglovits, & Neal, 2018; Mittleman & Jennings, 2018; Sun, Kennedy, & Anderson, 2020). However, each school itself is embedded in a social and economical environment that exerts its very own influence on crucial factors for students’ learning success. Schools can provide learning opportunities and try to enforce student’s merely lawfully presence in the school building, but they have no or just very limited impact on environmental factors outside the school building; but these factors in turn constitute important student experiences that shape behavior outside and inside school as well as attitudes toward learning, and that also influence behavior at school. For example, while unemployment and crime rates of a neighborhood are correlated (Bender & Theodossiou, 2016), evidence from a longitudinal study in Chicago suggests that a neighborhood’s crime rate also exerts a lasting negative effect on school progress (Burdick-Will, 2016). Other studies from Chicago and New York corroborate the finding that neighborhood SES and crime rate impact student academic achievement (Laurito  et al., 2019; Ruiz, McMahon, & Jason, 2018; Schwartz et al., 2016). This lack of academic success, on the other hand, constitutes a disadvantage for professional development and career opportunities that is likely to persist for students’ life times, hence hindering social-economical advancement, which in turn entrenches said social inequalities; as such disadvantaged and impoverished neighborhoods are most likely to be inhabited by racial minorities, this mechanism finally also perpetuates systemic racism. The current pandemic and the resurgence of the Black Lives Matter movement dramatically emphasize this inequality and its consequences, especially in times of limited resources and societal and economical tension and challenges.
Drawing on this background, I propose for my final capstone project the following scenario: the mayor of a metropolitan area in the US wonders if there is a way to use urban planning as a tool to develop local neighborhood communities in such a way that the development of local business and community services impact community safety, which exerts in turn a positive effect on academic performance. 
More specifically, our mayor has already heard of studies suggesting that neighborhood crime rates have a negative impact on students’ academic performance, e.g. by enhancing the stress levels that students experience at home and/or on the way to school, which can also hamper student’s attention at school (e.g. Harding, 2009; Lord & Mahoney, 2007; Pelletier & Manna, 2017; Will, Stein & Grigg, 2019; Wodtke & Parbst, 2017). Some of his advisors have pointed out to him, that economical and recreational features of the urban environment also influence crime rates and perceived neighborhood crime. For example, researchers have found that an increase of parks tree canopy was inversely related to crime growth in Portland, Oregon, and Baltimore (Donovan & Prestemon, 2012; Troy, Grove, & O’Neil-Dunne, 2012) as well as - within a smaller-ranged experimental design - in Philadelphia (Garvin, Cannuscio, & Branas, 2013). At the same time, there is a positive relation between crime and the density of alcohol establishments (e.g. Groff, 2011; Toomey et al., 2012) or payday lenders and property crime (Lee, Gainey, & Triplett, 2014); the fact that the latter study’s did not find such a correlation with pawnshops suggests that this relation cannot be explained only by considering payday lenders an indicator of neighborhood poverty in general.

On the other hand, he also wonders to which degree neighborhood properties have an influence on crime and live quality. E.g., to which degree does the presence of gambling venues and bars or tabacco stores indicate - and maybe even influence - the presence of crime? Are there urban panning indicators for a healthy neighborhood community, e.g. the presence of parks, places to worship, the kind of restaurants etc.? E.g. coffee shops predicted in a study on gentrification in Chicago crime rates differentially depending on race and the kind of crime (homicide versus robbery; Papachristos et al., 2011), crime rates have been related to the presence of fast food restaurants (Askey et al., 2018), and in Baltimore, crime rates have been lowered by spatial regulation of alcohol-outlets and bars (Jennings et al., 2014). For that reason purpose, our imaginary major commissions a research institute to examine if properties of neighborhood communities that can be influenced by urban planning (e.g. permissions for certain businesses, support in form of financial support and advise for new startups, investment in infrastructure  etc.) have an influence on the crime rate of the neighborhood, the way people perceive these venues, and if and to which degree finally urban structure, venue perception and crime rate exert  an influence on academic performance.
Drawing on this, our mayor derives the following questions for researchers and/or data analysts:
1.)	Does neighborhood crime rates exert a considerable influence on students’ academic performance on public schools?
2.)	Can neighborhood features be identified that have an influence on crime and that in turn can be shaped and/or altered by urban planning?
3.)	Is it possible to influence academic performance positively by the use of urban planning to alter crime rates?
4.)	Can we derive from such features something like neighborhood indicators that might signal policy makers the urge of action?
